README.md, before:

# Outbound IP Collector

A simple solution to capture all outbound traffic from a Linux host, store hourly packet captures, and periodically extract unique destination IPs into a single file. All logs, PCAPs, and outputs are centralized in one directory for easy management.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)  
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)  
- [Directory Structure](#directory-structure)  
- [Installation & Setup](#installation--setup)  
- [Usage](#usage)  
- [How It Works](#how-it-works)  
- [Scripts & Components](#scripts--components)  
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)  
- [License](#license)  

---

## Features

- **Continuous Packet Capture**  
  • Runs `tcpdump` on a user-specified interface, rotating hourly and keeping the last 24 PCAP files.  
- **Centralized Storage**  
  • All PCAPs, logs, and unique-IP output are stored under `/var/log/outbound_collector/`.  
- **Automated Unique IP Extraction**  
  • Every 12 hours, parses recent PCAPs to extract destination IPs, merges them into one deduplicated file.  
-- **Self-Scheduling via `cron`**  
  • The setup script installs a root `cron` job that runs the extraction script every 12 hours.  
-- **Minimal Dependencies**  
  • Only requires: `tcpdump` and a standard Linux shell environment.
- **Enhanced Data Extraction**  
  • Extracts destination IPs, ports, protocol information, and packet size from PCAP files.  
  • Provides detailed insights into outbound traffic.

---

## Prerequisites

1. **Linux Host** (CentOS, Ubuntu, Debian, etc.)  
2. **Root (or `sudo`) access**  
3. **Installed Packages**  
  - `tcpdump`  
  - cron (root crontab will be used to schedule the extractor; cron is usually installed by default on most Linux distributions)

   ```bash
   # Debian/Ubuntu
   sudo apt update
  sudo apt install tcpdump

   # RHEL/CentOS
  sudo yum install tcpdump
   ```

4. **SELinux/AppArmor** (if enabled) should allow `tcpdump` to write to `/var/log/outbound_collector/`.  

---

## Directory Structure

After setup, the repository (and local machine) will have:

```
.
├── README.md
├── outbound_ip_collector.sh         # Main setup script
└── /var/log/outbound_collector/     # (created at runtime)
    ├── conn-all-YYYYMMDDHHMM.pcap   # Hourly rotating PCAP files (up to 24)
    ├── unique_ips.txt               # Cumulative list of all unique destination IPs
    ├── outbound_ip_collector.log    # Log file for captures & extraction runs
    └── extract_unique_ips.sh        # Helper script scheduled via cron
```

---

## Installation & Setup

1. **Clone or download this repository** onto your Linux host:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/krishz-kishore/outbound-ip-collector.git
   cd outbound-ip-collector
   ```

2. **Make the main script executable**:
   ```bash
   sudo chmod +x outbound_ip_collector.sh
   ```

3. **Run the setup script**:
   ```bash
   sudo ./outbound_ip_collector.sh
   sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh
   ```

4. **Verify initial setup**:
   - Ensure `tcpdump` is running:
     ```bash
     ps aux | grep '[t]cpdump'
     ```
   - Check that `/var/log/outbound_collector/` exists and is writable:
     ```bash
     ls -ld /var/log/outbound_collector

  - Verify that the extractor cron job is installed (root crontab):
    ```bash
    sudo crontab -l | grep -F "/usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh" || echo "No cron job found (cron not installed or job not added)"
    ```
     ```

---

## Usage

Once installed, everything runs automatically.

To manually extract IPs:
```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh
```

### Visualization
The visualization script reads the aggregated CSV (output by the extractor) and generates images + a small HTML report.  
Install dependencies first:
```bash
sudo pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```
Run the visualization script (default reads `/var/log/outbound_collector/unique_ips.txt` and writes to `/var/log/outbound_collector`):
```bash
sudo python3 visualize_suspicious_activity.py --input /var/log/outbound_collector/unique_ips.txt --outdir /var/log/outbound_collector
```
Helpful switches:
 - `--no-dns`: disable reverse DNS lookups (faster)
 - `--only-ips`: only generate the top IPs chart and exit

To view collected unique destination IPs:
```bash
sudo cat /var/log/outbound_collector/unique_ips.txt
```

## Uninstall / Remove

If you need to remove the collector and all its artifacts (PCAPs, logs, scripts), run the uninstall script:

```bash
sudo ./uninstall_outbound_ip_collector.sh
```

This script will stop tcpdump, remove the root cron job (if installed) or stop and disable the `systemd` service and timer (if created), and delete `/var/log/outbound_collector/` and the extraction script installed at `/usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh`.

---

## How It Works

1. **Setup Script**
   - Prompts for interface
   - Creates `/var/log/outbound_collector/`
   - Starts `tcpdump` with `-G 3600 -W 24` (rotates every hour, max 24 files)
  - Installs a systemd service & timer (preferred) to manage tcpdump; if systemd is not detected, a cron job will be created to run the extractor every 12 hours

2. **Extract Script**
   - Runs every 12 hours
   - Scans PCAPs modified in last 12 hours
   - Extracts destination IPs, ports, protocol, and packet size
   - Updates `unique_ips.txt` with deduplicated IPs and additional details

---

## License

This project is open-source and free to use.

Commit message:

Fix systemd service variable expansion syntax and add BASE_DIR to environment file
- Remove bash-style default syntax  from systemd directives
- Use simple  references which systemd expands from EnvironmentFile
- Add BASE_DIR to /etc/default/outbound_ip_collector initialization
- Ensures all required variables are available to tcpdump service
- Fixes 'bad unit file setting' error and permission denied issues

README.md, after:

# Outbound IP Collector

A simple solution to capture all outbound traffic from a Linux host, store hourly packet captures, and periodically extract unique destination IPs into a single file. All logs, PCAPs, and outputs are centralized in one directory for easy management.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)  
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)  
- [Directory Structure](#directory-structure)  
- [Installation & Setup](#installation--setup)  
- [Usage](#usage)  
- [How It Works](#how-it-works)  
- [Scripts & Components](#scripts--components)  
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)  
- [License](#license)  

---

## Features

- **Continuous Packet Capture**  
  • Runs `tcpdump` on a user-specified interface, rotating hourly and keeping the last 24 PCAP files.  
- **Centralized Storage**  
  • All PCAPs, logs, and unique-IP output are stored under `/var/log/outbound_collector/`.  
- **Automated Unique IP Extraction**  
  • Every 12 hours, parses recent PCAPs to extract destination IPs, merges them into one deduplicated file.  
-- **Self-Scheduling via `cron`**  
  • The setup script installs a root `cron` job that runs the extraction script every 12 hours.  
-- **Minimal Dependencies**  
  • Only requires: `tcpdump` and a standard Linux shell environment.
- **Enhanced Data Extraction**  
  • Extracts destination IPs, ports, protocol information, and packet size from PCAP files.  
  • Provides detailed insights into outbound traffic.

---

## Prerequisites

1. **Linux Host** (CentOS, Ubuntu, Debian, etc.)  
2. **Root (or `sudo`) access**  
3. **Installed Packages**  
  - `tcpdump`  
  - cron (root crontab will be used to schedule the extractor; cron is usually installed by default on most Linux distributions)

   ```bash
   # Debian/Ubuntu
   sudo apt update
  sudo apt install tcpdump

   # RHEL/CentOS
  sudo yum install tcpdump
   ```

4. **SELinux/AppArmor** (if enabled) should allow `tcpdump` to write to `/var/log/outbound_collector/`.  

---

## Directory Structure

After setup, the repository (and local machine) will have:

```
.
├── README.md
├── outbound_ip_collector.sh         # Main setup script
└── /var/log/outbound_collector/     # (created at runtime)
    ├── conn-all-YYYYMMDDHHMM.pcap   # Hourly rotating PCAP files (up to 24)
    ├── unique_ips.txt               # Cumulative list of all unique destination IPs
    ├── outbound_ip_collector.log    # Log file for captures & extraction runs
    └── extract_unique_ips.sh        # Helper script scheduled via cron
```

---

## Installation & Setup

1. **Clone or download this repository** onto your Linux host:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/krishz-kishore/outbound-ip-collector.git
   cd outbound-ip-collector
   ```

2. **Make the main script executable**:
   ```bash
   sudo chmod +x outbound_ip_collector.sh
   ```

3. **Run the setup script**:
   ```bash
   sudo ./outbound_ip_collector.sh
   sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh
   ```

4. **Verify initial setup**:
   - Ensure `tcpdump` is running:
     ```bash
     ps aux | grep '[t]cpdump'
     ```
   - Check that `/var/log/outbound_collector/` exists and is writable:
     ```bash
     ls -ld /var/log/outbound_collector

  - Verify that the extractor is scheduled (systemd or cron):
    ```bash
    # If systemd is used
    sudo systemctl status outbound-tcpdump.service
    sudo systemctl status outbound-tcpdump.timer
    # If cron is used
    sudo crontab -l | grep -F "/usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh" || echo "No cron job found (cron not installed or job not added)"
    ```
    ```bash
    sudo crontab -l | grep -F "/usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh" || echo "No cron job found (cron not installed or job not added)"
    ```
     ```

---

## Usage

Once installed, everything runs automatically.

To manually extract IPs:
```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh
```

### Visualization
The visualization script reads the aggregated CSV (output by the extractor) and generates images + a small HTML report.  
Install dependencies first:
```bash
sudo pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```
Run the visualization script (default reads `/var/log/outbound_collector/unique_ips.txt` and writes to `/var/log/outbound_collector`):
```bash
sudo python3 visualize_suspicious_activity.py --input /var/log/outbound_collector/unique_ips.txt --outdir /var/log/outbound_collector
```
Helpful switches:
 - `--no-dns`: disable reverse DNS lookups (faster)
 - `--only-ips`: only generate the top IPs chart and exit

To view collected unique destination IPs:
```bash
sudo cat /var/log/outbound_collector/unique_ips.txt
```

## Uninstall / Remove

If you need to remove the collector and all its artifacts (PCAPs, logs, scripts), run the uninstall script:

```bash
sudo ./uninstall_outbound_ip_collector.sh
```

This script will stop tcpdump, remove the root cron job (if installed) or stop and disable the `systemd` service and timer (if created), and delete `/var/log/outbound_collector/` and the extraction script installed at `/usr/local/bin/extract_unique_ips.sh`.

---

## How It Works

1. **Setup Script**
   - Prompts for interface
   - Creates `/var/log/outbound_collector/`
   - Starts `tcpdump` with `-G 3600 -W 24` (rotates every hour, max 24 files)
  - Installs a systemd service & timer (preferred) to manage tcpdump; if systemd is not detected, a cron job will be created to run the extractor every 12 hours

2. **Extract Script**
   - Runs every 12 hours
   - Scans PCAPs modified in last 12 hours
   - Extracts destination IPs, ports, protocol, and packet size
   - Updates `unique_ips.txt` with deduplicated IPs and additional details

---

## License

This project is open-source and free to use.
